In this lecture,
we're going to talk
about querying DataFrames.
The first step in the process is
to understand Boolean masking.
A Boolean masking is the heart of
first and efficient querying in
both NumPy and in Pandas,
and it's analogous a bit to
bit masking which is used in
other areas of computer science.
By the end of this lecture,
you'll understand how Boolean
masking works and how to
apply this to a DataFrame to
get out the data that
you're interested in.
Now, a Boolean mask is
an array which can be
thought of as a one
dimension like a series,
or two-dimensions
like a DataFrame,
where each of the values of
the array are either
true or false.
This array is essentially
overlaid on top
of the other data structure
that we're querying,
and any cell aligned
with the true value
will be admitted into
our final result,
and any cell aligned with
the false value will not.
Let's take a look. So let's
start with an example and
import our graduate
admissions dataset.
So first we'll bring in pandas.
So import pandas as pd,
then we'll load in
our CSV data file.
So we'll make a new variable df
as equal to pd.CSV,
and remember we're going to
use our index column zero,
and then we're going
to clean this up,
and fix a couple of
the poorly named columns
like we did in previous lecture.
So I'm going to use
our list comprehension here
x.lower.strip for
x in df.columns.
So these is just iterating
over a bunch of strings,
and turning them lower case,
and stripping out whitespace
from either side,
and let's take a look
at the results.
So Boolean masks are
created by applying
operators directly to
the pandas series or
DataFrame object.
For instance, in our graduate
admission dataset,
we might be interested in
seeing only those students that
have chance higher than
0.7 of being admitted.
To build a Boolean mask
for this query,
we want to project the chance
of admit column using
the indexing operator
and apply the
greater than operator where
the comparison value of 0.7.
This is essentially broadcasting
a comparison operator,
greater than, with the results
being returned as
a Boolean series.
The resultant series is indexed
where the value of
each cell is either true or
false depending on
whether a student has
a chance of admission
higher than 0.7.
So we'll create this thing
called an admit mask,
and we'll say df
sub chance of admit,
and then we're going to
broadcast against this columns.
So remember we're just
projecting a single column.
The greater than operator and
pass it a value of 0.7,
and let's take a look at what
that mid-month mask it is.
So this is pretty fundamentals.
So take a moment to look at this.
The result of broadcasting
a comparison operator
is a Boolean mask,
true or false values depending
on the results of the comparison.
Underneath, pandas is applying
the comparison operator that
you specified through
vectorization.
So it's efficiently
and in parallel
to all of the values in
the array that you specified,
which in this case, is the chance
of admit column of the DataFrame.
The result is a series objects,
since only one column
is being operated
on filled with
either true or false values,
which is what the comparison
operator returns.
So what do you do
with the Boolean mask
once you formed it?
Well, you could just
lay it on top of
the data and to hide the
data that you don't want,
which is represented by
all the false values.
We do this by using
the .where function on
the original DataFrame.
So df.where, and we're just
pass in a single parameter
the admit mask,
and let's take a look at what
that DataFrame looks like,
and we'll add the dot head.
So we see that
the resulting DataFrame
keeps the original index values,
and only data which met
the condition was retained.
All of the rows
which did not meet
the condition have
NaN data instead,
but these rows weren't
dropped from our dataset.
They're still there.
They're just not a number.
The next step is, of course,
if we don't want the NaN data
that we use dropna function,
and this is quite common.
So we actually use df.where,
passing the admit mask, and then,
on that resulting
DataFrame called dropna,
and then on that,
called dot head.
So the return data frame now has
all of the NAN rows dropped.
Notice that the index
now includes one
through four and
six, but not five.
Despite being really handy,
where isn't actually
used that often?
Instead, the panda devs created
a shorthand syntax which
combines where and dropna,
doing both at once,
and in typical fashion,
the just to overloaded the
indexing operator to do this.
So here's an example.
So we do df, and then inside
of the indexing operator,
we actually put our computation
for the Boolean mask.
So df sub chance of admit,
greater than 0.7.head.
So I personally find that
much harder to read,
but it's super common when
you're reading
other people's code.
So it's important to be able to
understand it and to write it.
Just reviewing this indexing
operator on the DataFrame,
it now does three things.
So first, it can be called with
a string parameter to
project a single column.
So if we do df sub
gre score.head,
we get a single column,
or you can send it a list
of columns as strings.
So df sub gre score,
and toefl score,
as sub parameter list,
or now you can send
it a Boolean mask.
So df and then we put
in here let's say
df sub gre score is
greater than 320,
and look at the head of that.
Each of these is mimicking
functionality from
either dot loc,
or dot where, dot dropna.
Before we leave this,
let's talk about
combining multiple Boolean masks,
such as multiple criteria
for including.
In bit masking and other places
in computer science,
this is done with "and".
If both masks must be
True, for a True value,
and to be in the final mask,
or "or" if only one
needs to be True.
Unfortunately, it doesn't feel
quite as natural in pandas.
For instance, if you want to take
two Boolean series and
add them together.
So here we do df
sub chance of admit,
greater than 0.7, and
let's say we want
df sub chance of
admit, less than 0.9.
So maybe these is the people who
got close to getting admissions,
we want to encourage
them to apply again.
But that didn't work and despite
using pandas for awhile,
I actually find a regularly try
and do what I just did.
The problem is that you have
a series object and Python
underneath doesn't
know how to compare
two series using AND, or, Or.
Instead, the pandas author
have overwritten
the pipe and ampersand operator
to handle this for us.
So we actually have to write
df sub chance of admit,
and then we use the ampersand
sign to and these together,
and so here we can see
this the combination,
the bitwise AND of
our two Boolean masks.
So one other thing to watch
out for is the order of
operations and this gets
me regularly as well.
A common error for
new pandas users is to try and
do Boolean comparisons using
the ampersand operator,
but not putting parentheses
around the individual terms
you are interested in.
So we could just write
what we wrote before,
but this time
without parentheses.
So df sub chance of
admit greater than 0.7,
ampersand df chance of
admit less than 0.9,
and we see that there's
an error for this as well.
The problem is that Python is
trying to bitwise and a 0.7,
and a pandas DataFrame,
when you really want a bitwise
and broadcast
DataFrames together.
Another way to do this
is actually just to get
rid of the comparison
operator completely,
and instead to use
the built-in functions
which mimic this approach.
So we can say df sub chance of
admit .gt for greater than 0.7,
and then bitwise and
this with the df chance
of admit .lt of 0.9.
So these functions
are built right
into the series and
DataFrame objects.
So you can actually
chain them too,
which results in
the same answer and
the use of No visual operator.
You can decide what
looks best for you.
So df sub chance of admit .gt 0.7,
actually returns our item,
and then we can say
.lt 0.9 right on that,
and so we can chain
these together.
So this only works
if your operator,
such as less than
or greater than,
is built into the DataFrame,
but I certainly
find the last code
example to be much more
readable than the one with
the ampersands in
the parentheses.
So you might want to
consider using this.
You need to be able to read
and write all of these,
and understand the implications
of the route you're choosing.
It's worth really going back and
rewatching this lecture to
make sure that you have it.
I would say 50 percent or
more of the work
you'll be doing in
data cleaning involves
querying DataFrames.
In this lecture, we've
learned to query
DataFrames using Boolean masking,
which is extremely important
and often used in
the world of data science.
With Boolean masking,
we can select
data based on
the criteria we define,
and frankly, you're going
to use this everywhere.
We've also seen how there
are many different ways
to query the DataFrame
and interesting site implications
that come up when doing so.